---
title: node-llama-cpp v3.0
date: 2024-09-23T22:00:00Z
lastUpdated: false
author:
    name: Gilad S.
    github: giladgd
category: Release
description: Learn more about the new features in node-llama-cpp v3.0!
image:
    url: https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/c7ed2eab-fb50-426d-9019-aed40147f30e
    alt: Celebrate
    width: 3072
    height: 1536
---
[`node-llama-cpp`](https://node-llama-cpp.withcat.ai) 3.0 is finally here.

With [`node-llama-cpp`](https://node-llama-cpp.withcat.ai), you can run large language models locally on your machine using the power of [`llama.cpp`](https://github.com/ggml-org/llama.cpp) with a simple and easy-to-use API.

It includes everything you need, from downloading models, to running them in the most optimized way for your hardware, and integrating them in your projects.

---

## Why `node-llama-cpp`?
You might be wondering, why choose `node-llama-cpp` over using an OpenAI API of a service running on your machine?

The answer is simple: simplicity, performance, and flexibility.

Let's break it down:

### Simplicity
To use `node-llama-cpp`, you install it like any other npm package, and you're good to go.

To run your project, all you have to do is `npm install` and `npm start`. That's it.

No installing additional software on your machine, no setting up API keys or environment variables, no setup process at all.
Everything is self-contained in your project, giving you complete control over it.

With `node-llama-cpp`, you can run large language models on your machine using Node.js and TypeScript, _without_ any Python at all.
Say goodbye to setup headaches, "it works on my machine" issues, and all other Python-related problems.

While `llama.cpp` is an amazing project, it's also highly technical and can be challenging for beginners.
`node-llama-cpp` bridge that gap, making `llama.cpp` accessible to everyone, regardless of their experience level.

### Performance
[`node-llama-cpp`](https://node-llama-cpp.withcat.ai) is built on top of [`llama.cpp`](https://github.com/ggml-org/llama.cpp), a highly optimized C++ library for running large language models.

`llama.cpp` supports many compute backends, including Metal, CUDA, and Vulkan. It also uses [Accelerate](https://developer.apple.com/accelerate/) on Mac.

`node-llama-cpp` automatically adapts to your hardware and adjusts the default settings to give you the best performance,
so you don't _have_ to configure anything to use it.

By using `node-llama-cpp` you are essentially running models _inside_ your project.
With no overhead of network calls or data serializations,
you can more effectively take advantage of the stateful nature of inference operations.

For example, you can prompt a model on top of an existing conversation inference state,
without re-evaluating the entire history just to process the new prompt.
<br/>
This reduces the time it takes to start generating a response, and makes more efficient use of your resources.

If you were using an API, you would have to re-evaluate the entire history every time you prompt the model,
or have the API store the state for you, which can use huge amounts of disk space.

### Flexibility
Since `node-llama-cpp` runs inside your project, you can also deploy it together with your project.
<br/>
You can run models in your [Electron](../guide/electron.md) app without requiring any additional setup on the user's machine.

You can build libraries that use large language models and distribute them as npm packages,
<br/>
or deploy self-contained Docker images and run them on any hardware you want.

You can use [any model you want](../guide/choosing-a-model.md), or even create your own and use it with `node-llama-cpp`.
<br/>
Download models [as part of `npm install`](../guide/downloading-models.md) or [on-demand from your code](../guide/downloading-models.md#programmatic).

[Tweak inference settings](../guide/chat-session.md#repeat-penalty) to get better results for your particular use case.

`node-llama-cpp` is regularly updated with the latest `llama.cpp` release,
but you can also [download and build the latest release](../guide/building-from-source.md#download-new-release) at any time with a single command.

The possibilities are endless.
You have full control over the models you use, how you use them, and where you use them.
You can tailor `node-llama-cpp` to your needs in ways that aren't possible with an OpenAI API (at least not efficiently or easily).

## Powerful Features
`node-llama-cpp` includes a complete suite of everything you need to use large language models in your projects,
with convenient wrappers for popular tasks, such as:
* [Enforcing a JSON schema](../guide/chat-session.md#response-json-schema) on the output the model generates
* Providing the model with [functions it can call on demand](../guide/chat-session.md#function-calling) to retrieve information or perform actions, even with some models that don't officially support it
* [Generating completion](../guide/text-completion.md) for a given text
* [Embedding text](../guide/embedding.md) for similarity searches or other tasks
* Much more

## Why Node.js?
JavaScript is the most popular programming language in the world, and Node.js is the most popular runtime for JavaScript server-side applications.
Developers choose Node.js for its versatility, reliability, ease of use, forward compatibility, and the vast ecosystem of npm packages.

While Python is currently the go-to language for data science and machine learning,
the needs of data scientists differ from those of developers building services and applications.

`node-llama-cpp` bridges this gap, making it easier to integrate large language models into Node.js and Electron projects,
while focusing on the needs of developers building services and applications.

## Try It Out
`node-llama-cpp` comes with comprehensive documentation, covering everything from installation to advanced usage.
It's beginner-friendly, with explanations for every step of the way for those who are new to the world of large language models,
while still being flexible enough to allow advanced usage for those who are more experienced and knowledgeable.

Experience the ease of running models on your machine with this single command:
```shell
npx -y node-llama-cpp chat
```

Check out the [getting started guide](../guide/index.md) to learn how to use `node-llama-cpp`.

## Thank You
`node-llama-cpp` is only possible thanks to the amazing work done on [`llama.cpp`](https://github.com/ggml-org/llama.cpp) by [Georgi Gerganov](https://github.com/ggerganov), [Slaren](https://github.com/slaren) and all the contributors from the community.

## What's next?
Version 3.0 is a major milestone, but there's plenty more planned for the future.

Check out the [roadmap](https://github.com/orgs/withcatai/projects/1) to see what's coming next,
<br />
and [give `node-llama-cpp` a star on GitHub](https://github.com/withcatai/node-llama-cpp) to support the project.
